feat(AIP-4223): add guidance on client-side validation (#888)
googleapis/aip: aip/client-libraries/4223.md

---
id: 4223
state: draft # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
created: 2022-05-11 # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
---

# Client-side paylod validation

Services document the behavior of specific request fields using the
`google.api.field_behavior` annotation defined in [AIP-203][]. This annotation
conveys how a service interprets the field, including how a field may be
validated (or not) by the service.

## Guidance

> Client libraries **must not** implement client-side payload validation based

Reviewer: This sounds too strict, given the "Local failures" section below.  Should we add "...other then for preventing local failures, as described below" or something like that?

Author: Done, and linked to the below header ;)

---
id: 4223
state: draft # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
created: 2022-05-11 # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
---

> # Client-side paylod validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Client-side payload validation
```

> Services document the behavior of specific request fields using the

Reviewer 2: This paragraph, on the face of it, does not tie in to the title of its section, though as we keep reading we realize it provides background. So I would suggest we move this information down to the "Motivation" section, and replace it here with something like:

"This AIP describes the role of client libraries in validating request contents before they are sent to the server."

Author: In other AIPs the section just before the Guidance provides an introduction, and in practice, some context, for the guidance (https://aip.dev/8#document-structure). I think I'd prefer to keep this paragraph here ,but improve it to be more relevant. Is that reasonable?

Reviewer 2: Sure, if that's the convention. Let's tie it in to **client-side** validation.

Author: Sure thing, I've updated it, please take a look!

`google.api.field_behavior` annotation defined in [AIP-203][]. This annotation
conveys how a service interprets the field, including how a field may be
validated (or not) by the service.

## Guidance

Client libraries **must not** implement client-side payload validation based
on the `google.api.field_behavior` annotation, except to prevent
[local failures](4223.md#local-failures).

> The `google.api.field_behavior` annotation is a primarily a machine-readable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `google.api.field_behavior` annotation is primarily a machine-readable
```

> The `google.api.field_behavior` annotation is a primarily a machine-readable

Reviewer 2: Should we have this and the following paragraphs under a section called "Motivation" or "Reasoning"? They explain why we're giving this guidance, but are not part of the guidance itself. (I'm fine with following AIP precedent on this.)

Author: Yeah this is tough because I wanted to document the _why_, but AIPs  don't have a pattern for sections like "Reasoning" as they are more "do this" rather than "here is a design doc". I put it under guidance and following the primary piece of guidance because I wanted to expand on it. I could see a subsection named `### Server-side validation` and explain why clients "must" depend on it (which implies why clients must not do it themselves). WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe we should start a precedent of adding a "motivation" section.

Less drastically, we could start this line with "The reason for this is that the google.api.field_behavior annotation ..."

Author: I went with the "less drastic" approach 😄

> form of _documentation_, and **not** configuration for payload validation. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
form of _documentation_, and **not** a configuration for payload validation. The
```

annotation conveys how the service _already_ handles the field, and alludes to
a service's own payload validation or expectations.

Admittedly, depending on services to implement payload validation means clients

> will make a network call that is bound to result in error. Furthermore, users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will sometimes make network calls that are bound to result in errors. Furthermore, users
```

then depend on services to provide actionable errors, when the client could have
provided a language-idiomatic, localized error. However, robust server-side
payload validation means that _all types_ of client (first party, third party,
`curl`, etc.) will benefit from the **same** validation, and that there is no
lag between service and clients when the field behavior changes.

> ### Local failures

Reviewer 3: Might be good to define "local failures". I'm not sure what this means, nor can I find this term referenced in any of the cross-referenced AIPs.

Author: Kind of similar to my response to Daniel's comment, it really is a language-dependent thing. Basically, validation of the request prior to the network call is acceptable to the extent that it prevents Null Pointer Exceptions, or a `panic`, or whatever is the idiomatic "crash" scenario in each language. I'd rather not get too specific because I don't want to enumerate something for every language, especially when something might be an error scenario in one language but not in another.

> nor can I find this term referenced in any of the cross-referenced AIPs.

It is a client code specific thing, not going to be in API Design AIPs.

Reviewer 3: Maybe change it to be,

> Client libraries **may** implement client-side payload validation based on the
`google.api.field_behavior` annotation only to the extent that it prevents
local failures, such as crashes within the client library code itself.

Author: Thanks, that sounds like a great addition. Will do

> Client libraris **may** implement client-side payload validation based on the

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if AIPs typically have examples, but it may be useful to show one here.

Author: I think I'd rather not provide an example as it is very language dependent (Language A might crash if a pointer is null but Language B might just default to an empty value). Is that fair?

Reviewer 4: Yeah thats fine

> Client libraris **may** implement client-side payload validation based on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Client libraries **may** implement client-side payload validation based on the
```

---
id: 4223
state: draft # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
created: 2022-05-11 # TODO(noahdietz): Update pre-merge
---

# Client-side payload validation

Client-side payload validation is the practice of inspecting the request payload
for any misconfigurations (e.g. missing required fields, attempting to update an
immutable field) prior to executing a network call with the payload. Typically,

> documentation communciates the expectations of the service with regards to each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation communicates the expectations of the service with regards to each
```

We should spell-check to ensure we catch all the typos....

request field, including any requirements on presence or format. The
`google.api.field_behavior` annotation defined in [AIP-203][] is the

> machine-readable form of this documentation that services use to communicate

Reviewer 2: How about 
"machine-readable format that services use to document"

"Communicate" suggests the questions "communicate to whom? Why shouldn't the libraries use this communication?". "Document" arguably suggests more strongly it is intended for human consumption, even if via machine processing.

(not a huge issue, so feel free to ignore)

Author: love it, done!

behavior in relation to specific request fields.

## Guidance

> Client libraries **must not** implement client-side payload validation based

Reviewer 5: Does this mean:
(1) we don't recommend client libraries to implement client side payload validation at all?
(2) we don't recommend client libraries to manually code validation based google.api.field_behavior but having an automatically generated validator is ok?
with the exception of preventing local failures.

Author: The scope of these documents is primarily for auto-generated client libraries i.e. GAPICs. Hand written clients are _typically_ staffed by engineers from or funded by the product team and aren't under the same purview. I think if we wanted to expand our guidance to hand-written clients, we'd need to take a more holistic approach to these AIPs.

So this really recommends that _autogenerated_ client libraries must not have client-side payload validation based on the google.api.field_behavior annotation.

Reviewer 5: So the upside of doing such validation on the client is saving network calls. 
What is the down side? 

Any possibility things may get out of sync where servers becomes more permissive
while client would prevent such calls? Wouldn't changes to the field_behavior be a 
breaking change?

Author: I discuss some tradeoffs in the third paragraph starting on line 30, please take a look there.

Basically, "yes, there is a possibility server and client get out of sync, more possibility for breaking changes in both client & server, and doing so favors firsty part clients over third-party ones".

Author: Spoke offline, and we came to a consensus! Resolving this.
